When my name is called I would say. “Your Honor, may I approach the bench”.
I will approach the bench and hand both the Judge and prosecutor the following copies of these case laws. Honeycutt v. Com; People v. Perlman; St. Louis v. Boecker; State v.Gerdes; and State v. Tomanelli ( located in the file: case law/important ones)
I would read the following to the Judge “Your Honor these are the most pertinent case laws dealing with the admissibility of evidence concerning a speeding measuring device. The high courts have unanimously agreed that for readings from a speed measuring device to be admitted."
The Judge or prosecutor might object saying that these rulings are from States other then the State the trial is being held.  I would say “Your honor, this State has no case law on its books regarding speeding tickets where readings from a speed measuring device are to be entered into evidence. A speed measuring device is no different in this State then in States that have ruled as to the admissibility of evidence. These rulings are from various States and they are consistent in their findings. As such the defense requests this court to consider these findings of learned Judges from the high courts.”

If the arresting officer is not present or the miserable Judge tries to have the affidavit entered as evidence then hand the Judge coppies of the sixth and and 14the ammendment. say " Your honor, the defendant has certain rights under the 6th and fourteenth ammendment to the United States constitution that tshall not be abrigated. One of those rights is to confront the witness against me. Unless the witness is dead I object to his affidavit being entered as evidence in this trial." 

Now let the trial proceed like in the tipmra. When the time comes to ask for the items you know the defense won't have the prosicutor will object.

The prosecutor will most likely object by saying: “Your Honor, had the defense wanted this information the defense should have subpoenaed this before trial”
I would reply with: “Your Honor, Since when is it the Defense responsibility to subpoena foundation material for the prosecution.  The prosecutor is a learned trial attorney who knows or at least should know of the case laws I presented to the court before trial. The prosecutor knows or should know that the speed measuring device must be a calibrated unit otherwise there is no legal certainty to any readings produced by that unit. The fact that the prosecution came unprepared should not be used against the defense.”
The prosecutor will most likely say something like this. “Your Honor, the defense has asked for material that the Prosecution did not bring. The prosecution should be given the opportunity to find this material and as such motions for new trial date or an extension to this trial so the prosecution can  find and bring the material to court.”
Object: “Your honor, the trial is today, now. The defense came prepared and objects to an extension. The prosecution chose to come unprepared. This motion should have been made before trial, not during trial. The prosecution should motion for a dismissal rather then an extension if they can’t lay proper foundation to the evidence they intend to present or if the prosecution is unable to present competent evidence.” (Mark this objection as you may have to use it at other points in the trial if the prosecutor motions for an extension) 
